Glossary
================
Robert A. Stevens
2021-10-12

**Alternative hypothesis:** The alternative to the null hypothesis.
Usually, it is the hypothesis that there is some effect present in the
population (e.g., two population means are not equal, a sample mean is
different from a population mean, etc.). Compare to **null hypothesis**.

**Central limit theorem:** The fact that as sample size increases, the
sampling distribution of the mean becomes increasingly normal,
regardless of the shape of the distribution of the sample.

**Confidence:** The fraction of times the confidence interval will
capture the true value if the experiment is hypothetically repeated a
large number of times. Equivalent to one minus the **Type I error** or
**significance level**.

**Confidence Interval:** A group of continuous or discrete adjacent
values that is used to estimate a statistical parameter (as a mean or
variance) and that tends to include the true value of the parameter a
predetermined portion of the time if the process of finding the group of
values is repeated a number of times.

**Degrees of freedom:** Roughly, the minimum amount of data needed to
calculate a statistic. More practically, it is a number, or numbers,
used to approximate the number of observations in a data set for the
purpose of determining statistical significance.

**Descriptive statistics:** Statistics that describe the characteristics
of a given sample or population. These statistics are only meant to
describe the characteristics of those from whom data were collected.
Compare to **inferential statistics**.

**Distribution:** A collection, or group, of values from a sample on a
single variable. Often, but not necessarily, these values are arranged
in order from smallest to largest.

**Effect size:** A measure of the size of the effect observed in some
statistic. It is a way of determining the practical significance of a
statistic by reducing the impact of sample size.

**Histogram:** A graphic summary of variation in a set of data. The
pictorial nature of the histogram lets people see patterns that are
difficult to see in a simple table of numbers. The histogram is one of
the Seven Tools of Quality.

**Hypothesis:** A tentative assumption made in order to test a theory to
its logical or empirical conclusion.

**Inferential statistics:** Statistics generated from sample data that
are used to make inferences about the characteristics of the population
the sample is alleged to represent. Compare to **descriptive
statistics**.

**Mean:** The arithmetic average of a distribution of values.

**Median:** The value in a distribution that marks the 50th percentile.
It is the value at which 50% of the distribution is below and 50% is
above.

**Mode:** The value in the distribution that occurs most frequently.

**Normal distribution:** A bell-shaped distribution of values that has
the mean, median, and mode in the middle of the distribution and is
symmetrical (the same shape on either side of the median) and asymptotic
(the ends, or “tails” never intersect the X-axis: they extend
indefinitely).

**Null hypothesis:** The hypothesis that there is no effect in the
population (e.g., that two population means are not different from each
other). Compare to **alternative hypothesis**.

**Operating characteristic curve:** A graph used to determine the
probability of accepting products as a function of the products’ or
processes’ quality level when using various sampling plans.

**p-value:** The probability of obtaining a statistic of a given size
from a sample of a given size by random chance, or due to random
sampling error.

**Paired:** When each value of one sample is matched to one value from a
second sample. Or, in the case of a single sample measured at two times,
when each value at Time 1 is matched with the value of the same
individual at Time 2. Also called “matched” or “dependent.”

**Paired t-test:** Test comparing the means of paired, matched, or
dependent samples on a single variable.

**Parameter:** A value derived from the data collected from a
population, or the value inferred to the population from a sample
statistic.

**Population:** The group from which data are collected or a sample is
selected. It encompasses the entire group for which the data are alleged
to apply.

**Power:** The probability of correctly rejecting the null hypothesis
when it is false. Equivalent to one minus the **Type II error**.

**Practical significance:** A judgment about whether a statistic is
relevant, or of any importance, in the “real world.” Compare to
**statistical significance**.

**Probability:** The likelihood of an event occurring.

**Random chance:** The probability of a statistical event occurring due
simply to random variation in the characteristics of samples of given
sizes selected randomly from a population.

**Random sampling error:** The error, or variation, associated with
randomly selecting samples of a given size from the population.

**Range:** The difference between the maximum (largest) value and the
minimum (smallest) value.

**Raw values:** These are the individual observed values on measured
variables.

**Sample:** An individual or group, selected from a population, from
whom or which data are collected.

**Significance level:** The *a priori* probability of falsely rejecting
the null hypothesis that the researcher is willing to accept. It is
used, in conjunction with the p-value, to determine whether a sample
statistic is statistically significant.

**Significant:** Shortened from of the expression “statistically
significant.”

**Standard deviation:** The square root of the variance.

**Standard value:** A raw value that has been converted to a z-value by
subtracting it from the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of
the distribution. It is an individual value expressed a deviation from
the mean in standard deviation units.

**Standardization:** The process of converting a raw value into a
**standard value**.

**Statistic:** A value derived from the data collected from a sample.

**Statistical significance:** When the probability of obtaining a
statistic of a given size due strictly to random sampling error, or
random chance, is less than the selected significance level, the result
is said to be “statically significant.” It also represents a rejection
of the null hypothesis. Compare to **practical significance**.

**t-test:** A test of the statistical similarity between the means of
two independent samples on a single variable.

**Type I error:** Rejecting the null hypothesis when in fact it is true.
An incorrect decision to reject something (such as a statistical
hypothesis or a products) when it is acceptable. Sometimes called
Producer’s Risk. Equivalent to the **significance level**. Compare to
**Type II error**.

**Type II error:** Failing to rejecting the null hypothesis when in fact
it is false. An incorrect decision to accept something when it is
unacceptable. Sometimes called Consumer’s Risk. Compare to **Type I
error**.

**Variance:** The sum of the squared deviations between the individual
values and the mean divided by the number of values in the population,
or by the number of values minus one in the sample.

**Variation:** A change in data, a characteristic, or a function that is
caused by one of four factors: special causes, common causes, tampering,
or structural variation.

**z-value:** Another term for a **standard value**.
